README.md, before:

# CS276

My reading notes for [CS276: Information Retrieval and Web Search, Spring 2019](https://link.iamblogger.net/cs276) from Stanford University.

Mostly contains the summary of the chapters from [Introduction to Information Retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/ycelu), along with memos for certain lecture slides and other sources.

## Week 01: Introduction and boolean retrieval

- [IIR Chapter 01: Boolean Retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/y3s4u)
- [IIR Chapter 02: The term vocabulary and postings lists](https://link.iamblogger.net/4yn6e)

## Week 02: More on inverted index

- [IIR Chapter 04: Index construction](https://link.iamblogger.net/yg-km)
- [IIR Chapter 05: Index compression](https://link.iamblogger.net/eqdl8)

## Week 03: Tolerant retrieval, and vector space model

- [IIR Chapter 03: Dictionaries and tolerant retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/o1vk7)
- [More on noisy channel](https://link.iamblogger.net/y4pqe)
- [IIR Chapter 06: Scoring, term weighting, and the vector space model](https://link.iamblogger.net/s26a6)

## Week 04: Probabilistic Retrieval

- [IIR Chapter 11: Probabilistic information retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/knk6o)

## Week 05: IR system evaluation, and speedups for free text queries 

- [IIR Chapter 8: Evaluation in information retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/t-1qi)
- [IIR Chapter 7: Computing scores in a complete search system](https://link.iamblogger.net/5lqu1)

## Week 06: Text classification using Naive Bayes, kNN, and SVM

- [IIR Chapter 13: Text classification and Naive Bayes](https://link.iamblogger.net/nual1)
- [IIR Chapter 14: Vector space classification](https://link.iamblogger.net/ir452)
- *IIR Chapter 15: Support vector machines and machine learning on documents* (WIP)

## Week 07: Word Embeddings

- [Notes from Lecture 14: Distributed word representations for information retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/usmky)

## Week 09: Crawling and Question Answering

- Notes from Lecture 19: Question answering (WIP)

Commit message:

README.md: notes about pandoc

README.md, after:

# CS276

My reading notes for [CS276: Information Retrieval and Web Search, Spring 2019](https://link.iamblogger.net/cs276) from Stanford University.

Mostly contains the summary of the chapters from [Introduction to Information Retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/ycelu), along with memos for certain lecture slides and other sources.

**Note:** To cope with mathematical notations, I've used [Pandoc](https://link.iamblogger.net/c4yw8) to convert all the Markdown notes into LaTeX pdfs. I think this is the easiest solution at the moment to view math formulas on GitHub. Please let me know if you think there's a better solution.

## Week 01: Introduction and boolean retrieval

- [IIR Chapter 01: Boolean Retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/y3s4u)
- [IIR Chapter 02: The term vocabulary and postings lists](https://link.iamblogger.net/4yn6e)

## Week 02: More on inverted index

- [IIR Chapter 04: Index construction](https://link.iamblogger.net/yg-km)
- [IIR Chapter 05: Index compression](https://link.iamblogger.net/eqdl8)

## Week 03: Tolerant retrieval, and vector space model

- [IIR Chapter 03: Dictionaries and tolerant retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/o1vk7)
- [More on noisy channel](https://link.iamblogger.net/y4pqe)
- [IIR Chapter 06: Scoring, term weighting, and the vector space model](https://link.iamblogger.net/s26a6)

## Week 04: Probabilistic Retrieval

- [IIR Chapter 11: Probabilistic information retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/knk6o)

## Week 05: IR system evaluation, and speedups for free text queries 

- [IIR Chapter 8: Evaluation in information retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/t-1qi)
- [IIR Chapter 7: Computing scores in a complete search system](https://link.iamblogger.net/5lqu1)

## Week 06: Text classification using Naive Bayes, kNN, and SVM

- [IIR Chapter 13: Text classification and Naive Bayes](https://link.iamblogger.net/nual1)
- [IIR Chapter 14: Vector space classification](https://link.iamblogger.net/ir452)
- *IIR Chapter 15: Support vector machines and machine learning on documents* (WIP)

## Week 07: Word Embeddings

- [Notes from Lecture 14: Distributed word representations for information retrieval](https://link.iamblogger.net/usmky)

## Week 09: Crawling and Question Answering

- Notes from Lecture 19: Question answering (WIP)
